{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f28\fswiss\fcharset128\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial Unicode MS;}
{\f29\fswiss\fcharset128\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}@Arial Unicode MS;}{\f30\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f31\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f33\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f34\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f35\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f36\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f37\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f256\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS Western;}{\f254\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS CE;}{\f255\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS Cyr;}{\f257\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS Greek;}
{\f258\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS Tur;}{\f259\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS (Hebrew);}{\f260\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS (Arabic);}{\f261\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Unicode MS Baltic;}
{\f264\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS Western;}{\f262\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS CE;}{\f263\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS Cyr;}{\f265\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS Greek;}
{\f266\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS Tur;}{\f267\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS (Hebrew);}{\f268\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS (Arabic);}{\f269\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 @Arial Unicode MS Baltic;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;
\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\sb100\sa100\sbauto1\saauto1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\fs36\lang1033\langfe1033\loch\f28\hich\af28\dbch\af28\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext2 heading 2;}{\s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb100\sa100\sbauto1\saauto1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\fs27\lang1033\langfe1033\loch\f28\hich\af28\dbch\af28\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext3 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{
\s15\ql \li0\ri0\sb100\sa100\sbauto1\saauto1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\loch\f28\hich\af28\dbch\af28\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 Normal (Web);}}{\info
{\title Personal Solutions, Family Solutions}{\author DRJ}{\operator DRJ}{\creatim\yr2006\mo2\dy27\hr11\min13}{\revtim\yr2006\mo2\dy27\hr11\min13}{\version1}{\edmins0}{\nofpages8}{\nofwords2330}{\nofchars13281}{\nofcharsws16310}{\vern8243}}
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace180\dgvspace180\dghorigin1800\dgvorigin1440\dghshow1\dgvshow1
\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule \fet0\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1
\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s2\qc \li0\ri0\sb100\sa100\sbauto1\saauto1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\fs36\lang1033\langfe1033\loch\af28\hich\af28\dbch\af28\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 Personal Solutions, Family Solutions
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qc \li0\ri0\sb100\sa100\sbauto1\saauto1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs27\lang1033\langfe1033\loch\af28\hich\af28\dbch\af28\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
by John Taylor Gatto
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\loch\af28\hich\af28\dbch\af28\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\b\f256 \hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 \hich\f256 
If you have no time for your family you want to ask yourself, 'Why must I always be do-ing something?' God made us human be-ings, not do-ings!\'94}{\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28  - }{\i \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
Heard over a car radio between Omaha and North Platte, Nebraska}{\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28  
\par }\pard \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f256 \loch\af256\dbch\af28\hich\f256 \'93\loch\f256 \hich\f256 Do nothing. Time is too precious to waste,\'94\loch\f256 
 said Buddha. If that sounds like nonsense stop reading now, but if you feel you've been conditioned like a laboratory rat by the pervasive propaga}{\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
nda of 20th century institutions like schools and banks and hospitals, read on. One quick way to tell if mechanism has invaded your living tissue is to consider how important lists are to your life. Home improvement lists, self-improvement lists, lists of
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28  \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 meetings, appointments, responsibilities, things to remember? Does list management fill much of your time? 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 And does your social life consist of watching actors pretend to be real people or telling your friends what you bought, what you nearly bought, and \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
what you are going to buy? If somewhere along the way your life has come to seem pointless, then read on as I tell you how Janet and I came to do nothing with our farm on purpose. It might help you understand what Buddha had on his mind. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 Twenty-eight year}{\f256 \hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 s ago, after six years of living in Manhattan \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256  I from Pittsburgh and Janet from Oyster Bay \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256 
 we bought 134 acres of land in rural New York State located midway between Ithaca where I'd gone to school and Cooperstown where the Baseball Hall of Fame is. Th\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 e}{\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
 land was in Chenango County, in the southeastern corner of the Burned-Over District, an area of great spiritual ferment in the 19th century which had produced the Mormons, the Perfectionists, the Millerites, the incident that launched the Anti-Masonic Pa
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 r\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 ty, and a host of other individualistic, quirky movements that attest to how rich life can be in an a-systematic society. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 I bought the land with a fellow schoolteacher, sight unseen, in a manner I'll explain in a moment. Chenango County was, is, and alway\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
s will be, I think, lightly populated, a corn and cow/sheep land not fit for the attention of sophisticated tourists and real estate speculators. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 The population of the nearest town to my farm is the same now as it was in 1905 and the whole county has abou\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
t 50 inhabitants a square mile, about 1/6th less than it had in 1835 in the glory days of the Chenango Canal. Even in 1993 plenty of beautiful land was available there for $500 an acre or less, 90 minutes from Syracuse, two hours of Albany, four hours fro
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 m\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
 New York City. I paid much less than that in 1968 when I acquired the property, about $48 an acre with a 7-year mortgage at 6 percent. That's probably the chief reason I bought the land unseen when I saw the ad in the real estate listings of the Sunday N
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 e\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 w York Times. 
\par }{\f256 \hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 \hich\f256 
That particular Sunday I had been sitting with friends ranting and raving about how many great bargains are always available if you know what value is. I offered to prove the point on the real estate pages. \'93\loch\f256 Just buy what no one else wants a
\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 s long as you're sure that the reasons for not wanting it \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256  dirt roads, no running water, things like that \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256 \hich\f256  are dumb.\'94\loch\f256  Then I read: }{

\par }{\i \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 Tumbling Waterfall Retreat 134 acres. 7 year mortgage. 6%. Old barn, pond sites, 5 miles from Oxford, New York. $6500.}{\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28  
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 Th\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
e next day I picked up the phone, dialed the agent, and told him I'd wire the down payment that day, $500. If you know your own mind (which isn't a priority of schooling) you don't often need expert advice to make decisions because you are the only real e
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 x\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
pert on what you need and what you can live with. How did I know the land was any good? That's easy, any good for what? What should it be good for, to make money? I thought it ought to offer a private place away from machinery where you could do just abou
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 t\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
 anything you wanted without interference and nosy neighbours. With a little long-distance research I knew it was good for that so I bought it without worrying. At $500 down and around $100 a month payments almost anyone could have bought that land if the
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 y\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28  weren't afraid. 
\par }{\f256 \hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 \hich\f256 What was to be afraid of? The taxes were about $300 a year and a nearby farmer paid $100 to cut off the hay. He paid us to cut our \'93\loch\f256 \hich\f256 grass\'94\loch\f256 . }{
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 Wild land exists to put us smack in the middle of animal nature, creatures who regulate their liv\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
es in a different way than we do ours; it exists to teach seasons, fertility, and that there is no death, just endless translations from one form to another. Wild land gives you back the sky and the harmonies of the planet, but it charges an invisible pri
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 c}{\f256 \hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 e for what it has to give \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256  you must leave it wild or it loses its power and becomes a green office. }{
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 By the time my wild land came along I was 32 and was just beginning to reach the stage in my own life where I could see that doing things the right way, r\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
ationalizing your time on the best principles of human engineering, and living your life from the prison chamber of your mind instead of your heart was a catastrophic mistake. I had already mutilated my family with too many rational decisions by that time
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28  \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 and was slowly beginning to care. 
\par }{\f256 \hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 \hich\f256 The \'93\loch\f256 \hich\f256 life\'94\loch\f256 
 part of life just won't engineer all the way unless you're willing to become a mechanism. All the rewards of the good life that can be counted, like money and titles and honours and complex property requiring e\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 
xpert advice to manage \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256  the material things \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256 
 were at the bottom disturbingly unrewarding. I hadn't always thought that way for I had gone to two Ivy League colleges specifically to accumulate material and display it as evidence of my worth. And I did th\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 a}{
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 t for a while but it left me feeling worthless. A great puzzle for many of us, that irony. 
\par }{\f256 \hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 After I bought that land I forgot the lesson I'm trying to teach you \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256  or rather Buddha is trying to teach you and me. For five years I raced about digging ponds, c
\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 hopping trees, clearing paths, pulling rocks, unclogging channels, planting \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256 \hich\f256  always making lists, plans, agendas. I was always \'93\loch\f256 \hich\f256 improving\'94\loch\f256 
 things. I loved to drive in the little towns of the county to shop and see movies and sit around bars pretending to\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256  }{\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
be a country gentlemen, but regularly Janet would ask why we couldn't just stay on the land, why did we always have to be going and doing? At first it baffled me, but later as I reflected on it I understood that Janet was keeping score a different way and
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28  }{\f256 \hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 \hich\f256 that intrigued me. Stay on the land and do what? Work, of course, to \'93\loch\f256 \hich\f256 improve\'94\loch\f256  it, but then what? }{
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 One day after finishing some important project I made a list of all the things I had yet to do according to the Master Plan of my land ambition. There were 5\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
0 major projects remaining, and at two a year, which was all I could manage racing back and forth from New York City on weekends and summers, I would be 65 when they were done. According to my schedule I could begin enjoying my land 30 years down the line
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 .\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28  
\par }{\f256 \hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 \hich\f256 Something was dreadfully wrong. What was wrong was that I was a fool. Like so many of us I was a part in an abstract idea-machine called \'93\loch\f256 \hich\f256 progress\'94\loch\f256 
; like an accountant I measured success by the bottom line of things done, gotten out of the way, finished,\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 \hich\f256 
 terminated. That's how a computer might be set to keep track of work, but the pleasure of being lies in the process, not the mere product, primarily in \'93\loch\f256 \hich\f256 being\'94\loch\f256 \hich\f256  and only peripherally in \'93\loch\f256 
\hich\f256 doing\'94\loch\f256 . In the world we've fashioned built on our envy of machines w\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 e}{\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
've arranged things to reverse the natural order of importance; somewhere deep down everyone understands this, but in avoiding the truth we assign ourselves a miserable destiny trying to be machines. Those who succeed best at this lead horrible lives rega
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 r}{\f256 \hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 dless of appearances. Watching and being part of the natural world and understanding it is the great domestic challenge \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256 
 without success at this we never have a home \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256  what Nature can give it stops giving when it is over regulated, or exploited with ag-s\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 c}{\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
hool technology and bulldozers. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 We all need the wildness of the non-human planet to restore our spirits, not parks and beaches where the human element is still the central focus and regulation runs rampant. Instead we collect evidence of our domination by
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28  mapping it, scheduling it, and controlling it. And all that gives us is a green imitation of city life and square tomatoes. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 So now I do nothing with my farm. I go there to let it teach me things. Sometimes I putter but not often because time is too preci}{\f256 \hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 \hich\f256 
ous to waste. The living quarters are in an old barn with \'93\loch\f256 \hich\f256 1906\'94\loch\f256 
 drawn in the concrete on the milking floor. My original intention was to build a broad covered porch around the whole structure and arrange the inside like a private cathedral with a 50-foot\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256  }{
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 ceiling. Still not a bad idea but now, 27 years later, it remains a barn and that turned out to be a better idea. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 There's about 1,200 square feet of open space on the hay floor and way up in the air against the roof is a 20x20 insulated room reached by cl\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
imbing three banks of wooden straps. Kenny, who was the boyfriend of one of my college students, built the room, roofed and refloored the barn, in exchange for 5 acres of land. Good deal all around. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 But much of the time we don't use the insulated room, in\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
stead sleeping in the two lovely old beds under the lofty roof with mice racing about the rafters in plain view (not too many), bats squeaking in the eaves, barn swallows twittering, and the most amazing light pouring through inch-wide spaces between the 
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 v\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 ertical wall boards. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
It's very much like living in a bird house. We draw water from a gorge a half-mile away which probably should have been tested but never was; drinking hundreds of gallons, at first tentatively, then with delight, was the test. No wate
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
r ever tasted like our gorge water run over rocks; I've come to see that participating with the water you drink is a wonderful way to feel good; it took some time to get used to the walk back and forth and to clear away the machined notion that time was s
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 o\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 mehow being wasted. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
Bathing is out of a bucket or in pools and ponds, and the toilet is wherever you are with the details varying according to the person and a proper respect for such things. On Manhattan's famous Upper West Side we have three bathrooms b
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
ut they give us no better results. In over a quarter-century I can honestly say we never missed running water or plumbing, and the transition from both was effected almost at once. That was surprising, how close to the surface our human good sense is, in 
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 s\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 pite of all the conditioning and mechanical overlay. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 Our barn holds about 3,000 books which must fend for themselves in all seasons housed in many makeshift facilities. All were bought at country auctions for a dollar or two a box, lots of 19th century ev}{\f256 
\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 angelical stuff, hand-coloured children's books, Crime Club thrillers, whatever \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256 
 when you read in a barn it's like discovering reading all over again. It's the greatest fun, far beyond television, movies and Broadway shows; having had both over a reasona\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 b}{\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
ly long lifetime I feel I can say that honestly. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 The main activity on our farm is keeping animals, as it is on many farms, but the difference is we don't own any of them, and they feed themselves. Deer are so plentiful they are a daily experience, snortin
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
g, playing like young dogs, hanging out; wild turkey are common, too, and at night they flock by the squadron in the gorge behind the barn; snakes abound but no one has ever been bitten, skunks, turtles, racoons, coyote, fox, mink, one bear, and a large c
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 o\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
lony of blue herons that land on the pond and fish like pterodactyls off our half-sunken dock. The bear moved in on the stream at the foot of the hill last year. Live and let live works better than regulation; it's nice to have a bear around. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 The most unb\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
elievable creatures of all are the night moths. Janet discovered these one night just outside the barn flying in the half-light; their shapes and colors are so divorced from any normal insect life I'm familiar with. I felt transported into a prehistory wh
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 e\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 n the world was new just watching them. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 When I used to schoolteach, my kids and I would discuss style a lot, getting a style of your own and how that must be done. I gradually came to feel it was }{\f256 \hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 
very difficult unless you were alone a lot, had time and space to yourself, were free of the need to attend other people's urgencies all the time \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256 
 or the urgencies of a commercial world. How can you expect to be unique if every minute you draw models fro\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 m}{\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
 other people and the shadows of other people drawn from television? How can the unique destiny that is in every one of us exercise itself if you always submit to the scrutiny and judgment of authorities? Authorities on what? Certainly not on you unless y
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 o\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 u have been diminished into something predictable, tamed by regulation, simplification, and rationalization. A steady diet of that will waste all your time. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 Compelling evidence exists that we are meant to be unique individuals who live in harmony with oth\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
er unique individuals: think of the harmony of snow falling, but the brilliant oneness of each snowflake; think of the harmony of beach sand, but the brilliant oneness of each sandgrain; think of the harmony of a field of grass, but the brilliant oneness 
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 o}{\f256 \hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 f each blade in shape, and even hue. Are we that way, too? Consider your own fingerprint, unlike any on earth, your unique signature \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256 
 can you think of a reason for evolution to produce such a signal unless the organism is one of a kind? And if you think \hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 o\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 
f God instead of evolution it will be even easier to deduce a purpose in all of this. If people are inherently sortable into a few categories \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256  as industrial civilization makes them out to be \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256 
 then the fingerprint is a crazy detail, it only makes sense a\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 s}{\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28  a guide to the individual experiment that each of us is. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 As Buddha said, time is too precious to waste doing much of anything. I'm still learning what that means, but I never might have known about this at all if I hadn't bought a big piece of wild, unre
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
gulated scrub land and left it that way. I hope my children's children leave it that way, too, if circumstances allow them to inherit it. I learned just to be from watching sunfish in the pond, birds taking dust baths on the dirt road, frogs watching me a
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 s}{\f256 \hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 \hich\f256  I watched them. Janet once said, \'93\loch\f256 \hich\f256 Hey, look at us, we're watching the birds, not just `bird watching'.\'94\loch\f256 
 It's an important difference. }{
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 Of course we do things, too: we eat lots of wild foods that we used to call weeds, we dig up blueberry bushes for gifts,\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
 build bonfires at night, transplant wild flowers, stuff like that. I finally figured out why real farms are often messy looking around the buildings, when you kick over something unimportant it doesn't need to be picked up right away, and nothing should 
\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 e\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 ver be thrown away that might be useful tomorrow. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 In the time we won back decontrolling our reflexes we came to learn to manage our spirits better; it's impossible to live this way without coming to love nearly everything, and feeling an obligation to it,}{\f256 
\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 \hich\f256  too. We have a laboratory of nature stretched out daily for our understanding, not our exploitation. The greatest use of wild places isn't in \'93\loch\f256 \hich\f256 using\'94\loch\f256 
 them but just in being there. }{
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 Personal solutions exist. Out of personal solutions great solutions can be}{\f256 \hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256  put together. The one I've described just now is within reach \hich\f256 \endash \loch\f256 \hich\f256 
 wild land, the less road-accessible and \'93\loch\f256 \hich\f256 improved\'94\loch\f256  the better, is available in abundance within an easy drive of every metropolitan area in North America, much more so today than it was a hu
\hich\af256\dbch\af28\loch\f256 n}{\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 dred years ago. Get some as soon as you can, the wilder and scruffier the better. Then do nothing. It will be your school. And it might become your home. 
\par \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 I wish I might have been brought up to live in productive harmony with the land, but lacking that I'm\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
 grateful to have discovered the next best thing, to accept stewardship of it until someone better suited to live upon it self-sufficiently comes along. 
\par }\pard \s15\qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cf9 \hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 John Taylor Gatto won Teacher of the Year awards for New York City and New York State in the early 199\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28 
0s. He is the author of Dumbing Us Down: The Hidden Curriculum of Compulsory Schooling.}{\hich\af28\dbch\af28\loch\f28  
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {
\par }}